Using data collected straight from test subjects can be extremely helpful in formulating theories about second language acquisition. My goals in this research is to analyse the speech of a student of German. I plan to do more in depth into certain aspects of his language skills as well as determine his overall level of speaking fluency as based on the definition given on page 14 of our MELAB booklet.
My subject, who wishes to be called Max, is a 24-year-old program manager for an international company whose first language is English. He began learning the German language by himself at the age of 20 through reading and listening to cassette tapes. During the next two semesters of college after a summer of this self-teaching, he enrolled in a total of 18 credit hours of German and advanced rapidly in his language skills. Max was exposed to a variety of teaching methods at that time.
Feeling that he was then ready to gain some practical experience in a country where the language was spoken, he enrolled in an exchange program and spent a year in Munich studying at the university there and taking specially-designed classes through his program. He was in an immersion-style setting involving classes only taught in German but with students who all spoke the same first language and could therefore help each other with difficult aspects of grammar and pronunciation.
Today, Max no longer uses his German skills often and admits that they may have grown a bit rusty, although he does still speak with a perfect German accent. He still enjoys speaking the language and had a high personal motivation to learn it in the first place because language learning is a favorite pasttime of his.
I have rented an audio cassette player from LS&amp.A Media to record the verbal interraction between myself and Max. Other resources include parts of the readings discussed throughout the semester, as well as the MELAB booklet and handouts given out in class. I will also make use of the transcript of my recorded interview with Max for my analysis of his language skills.
One of the most important parts of the German language that does not exist in English is the presence of grammatical gender. As is the case with many other languages, nouns in German have had a gender arbitrarily assigned to them. This is one of the hardest aspects of German to learn because the monolingual English speaker has no experience with such things. and the English speaker with some contact with other languages will often also have difficulties because the genders of nouns may differ be different in German (i.e. el puente in Spanish, and die Brücke in German). I have chosen to take a more in-depth look into Max's use of indefinite articles since they came up more frequently than the definite articles and are similar in form and equally difficult to master. To make my data more easily intelligible, here is a chart of the indefinite articles of German.
For my analysis, I have taken several random samples from the pages of the transcript of my interview to look at the accuracy rate in Max's speech. These examples are representative of a general trend that I have found in his grammar. While Max does seem to have a basic grasp of the indefinite article, the more complicated and less-used forms still seem to allude him. Nominative tenses are correct most of the time, while accusative is correct some of the time, and dative and genitive are often incorrect. This leads me to believe that Max has memorized the basic (nominative) genders of the nouns but does not know how to decline them well. A glance at the definite and possessive articles in the transcript confirms this.
Verb placement is often difficult for second language learners because they must learn a new set of rules. In German, the verbs often occur in two different places in the sentence, with the modal verb before or after the subject (depending on whether it follows another item or not) or even at the end of a sentence (if the sentence begins with certain specific prepositions). To make this easier, all verbs will be in bold.
ich will in München leben correct (standard grammar)
mein Stiefvater wohnt in Italia correct (standard grammar)
*weiss ich gar nicht darüber incorrect - verb should be after subject
wir haben viel gemacht correct (standard grammar)
*ja, habe ich immer fliegen gemacht incorrect - verb should be after subject
This data shows that while Max does see that there is a possibility in German for a more varied verb placement, he does not know how and where to impliment it. All the sentences in the example were chosen because they should have the standard SVOV order. Some of them do and some don't, reflecting Max's evident confusion with this aspect of the grammar.
Another aspect of the verbs in German is that the past perfect can be conjugated using either to have or to be. For example, he has come in English would be er ist gekommen (he is come) in German. Verbs using the to be form usually pertain to motion or movement from one place or position to another.
*ich habe geflogen I have flown (I am flown)
*wir haben gefahren We have driven (We are driven)
ich habe studiert I have studied
und dann bin ich umgezogen I have moved (I am moved)
Here we see that Max is having problems distinguishing the to be verbs from the to have verbs. This probably is taken from his first language because English does not allow for to be verbs. Max rarely uses the to be form, even with the German verbs that call for it.
Using page 14 of the MELAB booklet given out in class, I would rank Max as a good speaker, but with a 3-, meaning that he is much closer to being a marginal/fair speaker than an excellent speaker. I chose this ranking because Max understood everything I asked him and could produce utterances easily and without accent. The reason he is not an excellent speaker is that he seems to have not yet grasped many of the aspects of the difficult grammar of German. He also sometimes had trouble finding the right word and often resorted to code-switching during our interview. I would suggest a more in-depth study of articles and sentence structure for Max, as well as more time spent in Germany. Being exposed directly to the language would help his German advance, and I am convinced that in time he would speak almost perfect German.